---
layout: page
title: Max Gross
subtitle: Ph.D. in Economics
---

### Peer-Reviewed Publications

[**Economics of Foster Care**](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/economics_of_foster_care.pdf) with Anthony Bald, Joseph J. Doyle, Jr., and Brian A. Jacob. **Journal of Economic Perspectives**, forthcoming.  

##### <span style="font-weight:normal"> Foster care provides substitute living arrangements to protect maltreated children. The practice is remarkably common: it is estimated that 5 percent of children in the United States are placed in foster care at some point during childhood. These children exhibit poor outcomes as children and adults, and economists have begun to estimate the causal relationship between foster care and life outcomes. This paper describes tradeoffs in child welfare policy and provides background on the latest trends in foster care practice to highlight areas most in need of rigorous evidence. These trends include efforts to prevent foster care on the demand side and to improve foster home recruitment on the supply side. With increasing data availability and a growing interest in evidence-based practices, there are opportunities for economic research to inform policies that protect vulnerable children. </span>

[**Temporary Stays and Persistent Gains: The Causal Effects of Foster Care**](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/foster_care.pdf) with E. Jason Baron. **American Economic Journal: Applied Economics** 14(2), 2022.  
 * [Public Policy Brief](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/foster_care_childrens_wellbeing.pdf) 

##### <span style="font-weight:normal"> Six  percent  of  children  in  the  United  States  enter  foster  care  by  age  18. We estimate the effects of foster care on children’s outcomes by exploiting the quasi-random assignment of child welfare investigators in Michigan. We find that foster care improved children’s safety and educational outcomes.  Gains emerged after children exited the foster  system  when  most  were  reunified  with  their  birth  parents,  suggesting  that improvements  made  by  their  parents  was  an  important  mechanism.   These  results indicate that safely reducing the use of foster care, a goal of recent federal legislation, requires more effective in-home, prevention-focused efforts. </span>

[**The Effect of Course Shutouts on Community College Students: Evidence from Waitlist Cutoffs**](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/course_shutouts.pdf) with Silvia Robles and Robert W. Fairlie. **Journal of Public Economics** 99, 2021.
 * [Public Policy Brief](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/course_closed.pdf) 


##### <span style="font-weight:normal"> One frequently cited yet understudied channel through which funding levels impact college students is course availability—colleges are often forced to respond to budgetary pressure by reducing course offerings. We provide the first causal evidence on this mechanism at a community college, using administrative course registration data and a novel research design that exploits discontinuities in course admissions created by waitlists. Community colleges enroll about half of U.S. undergraduates and over half of minority students in public colleges. The impacts of course availability in this setting may be especially salient relative to four-year colleges due to open admissions policies, binding class size constraints, and a heavy reliance on state funding. Across a range of bandwidths, we find that students stuck on a waitlist and shut out of a course section were 22 to 28 percent more likely to take zero courses that term relative to a baseline of about 10 percent. Shutouts also increased transfer rates to nearby, but potentially less-desirable two-year colleges. These results offer some evidence that course availability can disrupt community college students’ educational trajectories. </span>

[**Early Exposure to Child Maltreatment and Academic Outcomes**](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/child_maltreatment_academic_outcomes.pdf) with Joseph P. Ryan, Brian A. Jacob, Andrew Moore, Brian E. Perron, and Sharlyn Ferguson.  
**Child Maltreatment** 23(4), Nov 2018.  


##### <span style="font-weight:normal"> Early childhood trauma increases the risk of academic difficulties. The purpose of this study was to investigate the prevalence of early contact with child protection services (CPS) and to determine whether early exposure to maltreatment investigations was associated with important academic outcomes. The authors focused specifically on standardized test scores (math and reading), grade retention, and special education status in third grade. The sample was diverse and included all children born between 2000 and 2006 and enrolled in Michigan’s public schools (N = 732,838). By the time these students reached third grade, approximately 18% were associated with a formal CPS investigation. In some school districts, more than 50% of third graders were associated with an investigation. African American and poor students were more likely to be investigated for maltreatment. Children associated with maltreatment investigations scored significantly lower on standardized math and reading tests, were more likely to be identified as needing special education, and were more likely to be held back at least one grade. These findings indicate that involvement with CPS is not an infrequent event in the lives of young children and that within some school districts, maltreatment investigations are the norm. Child welfare and educational systems must collaborate so that the early academic struggles experienced by victims of maltreatment do not mature into more complicated difficulties later in life. </span>

### Working Papers

[**Is There A Foster Care-to-Prison Pipeline? Evidence from Quasi-Randomly Assigned Investigators**](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/foster_care_and_crime.pdf) with E. Jason Baron.
 * [Executive Summary](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/foster_care_and_crime_summary.pdf) 

##### <span style="font-weight:normal"> Foster care placement is strongly associated with crime—for example, close to one fifth of the prison population in the United States is comprised of former foster children—yet there is little evidence on whether this relationship is causal. Leveraging the quasi-random assignment of child welfare investigators and administrative data from Michigan, we show that foster care placement substantially reduced the chances of adult arrests, convictions, and incarceration for children at the margin. Exploring mechanisms, we find that foster care also improved a range of children's safety, academic, and behavioral intermediate outcomes. A likely reason for children's improvements is that their birth parents made positive changes, as most children in our setting reunified with their parents after a short stay in foster care. In light of recent historic federal policy which prioritizes keeping children with their families, our analysis indicates that safely reducing foster care caseloads will require improving efforts to ensure child wellbeing in the home. </span>

[**The Effect of Summer Employment on the Educational Attainment of Under-Resourced Youth**](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/detroit_summer_employment.pdf) with Brian A. Jacob and Kelly Lovett.
 * [Public Policy Brief](https://max-gross.github.io/website_documents/detroit_summer_employment_brief.pdf) 
 * Press Coverage: [CBS Detroit](https://detroit.cbslocal.com/2018/04/11/youth-in-detroit-summer-jobs-program-gain-more-than-a-paycheck/), [Crain's Detroit Business](https://www.crainsdetroit.com/article/20180411/news/657856/um-study-detroit-youth-jobs-program-shows-educational-benefits), [Michigan Radio NPR](https://www.michiganradio.org/post/detroit-youth-summer-jobs-program-boosts-graduation-rates-lowers-absences)

##### <span style="font-weight:normal"> Summer youth employment programs are a popular way for municipalities to provide adolescents with skills and experiences thought to improve labor market outcomes. While research evidence on such programs has grown in recent years, it is still limited. In particular, it is not clear how, if at all, participation influences key educational outcomes. We study the program in Detroit, Michigan using a selection on observables identification strategy. In addition to controlling for a rich set of covariates, including baseline educational measures, we match participants to their classmates of the same race and gender who applied for the program, but did not participate. We find that participation is associated with a modest increase in educational attainment. Specifically, it increased the likelihood of enrolling in public school after the program by 1.5% and of graduating high school by 4%, relative to comparison means of 94.5% and 85%. Youth with the weakest academic skills benefited the most, as participation increased school enrollment by 2.2% and high school graduation by 5.5% for this group. Falsification tests of whether participation predicts pre-program characteristics as well as bounding exercises to account for omitted variables offer support that our results represent true effects of the program and not selection. </span>
